At the very beginning, the reader hears an old story-teller speaking of a famous old wizard called Taborlin the Great, who was captured by evil beings called the Chandrian. Escaping them, Taborlin fell from a great height - but since he knew the Name of the Wind, he called it and the Wind came and set him down safely. In later parts of the book, characters are often skeptical of such stories. Some kinds of magic are taught in The University as an academic discipline and have daily life applications (those who can afford it could buy magical lamps, much better than the candles used by poorer people). However, it is doubted that magicians can truly call upon The Wind, and the Chandrian - whose appearance is supposedly heralded by flames turning blue - are often dismissed as mythical bogeymen.

The story begins in the rural town of Newarre, introducing the innkeeper Kote and his assistant Bast, revealing that Kote is the renowned Kvothe: an unequaled sword fighter, magician, and musician, rumored to have killed a king and caused the present war. His assistant and student Bast is a prince of the Fae. Kvothe saves Chronicler, a traveling scribe, from spider-like creatures called Scrael, whereupon Chronicler asks to record Kvothe's story. Upon consenting, Kvothe tells Chronicler that this will take three days (corresponding to the planned trilogy of novels).

Kvothe begins his story during his childhood amongst a troupe of Edema Ruh, highly-reputed traveling performers. He spends a happy childhood, his loving parents training him from a young age as an actor, singer and lute player - and he does extremely well in all of these as in every other field to which he turns his hand. The troupe acquire the scholar and Arcanist 'Abenthy', who trains Kvothe in science and "sympathy": a discipline of causing changes using a link in one object which allows manipulation in another (a system drawing equally from modern thermodynamics, quantum entanglement, and voodoo dolls). Kvothe also witnesses Abenthy calling the wind to fend off suspicious townspeople and vows to discover the titular "Name of the Wind", permitting this control.

Kvothe's father, the famous bard Arliden, starts composing what was to be the greatest of his works - a ballad of the ancient tragic hero Lanre. For this composition, Arliden starts collecting all the various tales of the mythical "Chandrian" and trying to get at the kernel of truth behind them - without explaining how this is related to Lanre. This inquiry turns out to have fatal consequences. When the troupe makes a halt, Kvothe's mother sends him to gather sage in the surrounding woods. Upon returning, he finds his parents and all members of the troupe dead, and the all too real Chandrian seated around the campfire which had turned blue. Evidently, they disliked Arliden's researches and came to silence him and everybody else with whom he might have shared his findings. The twelve-years old Kvothe is on the point of being killed by the Chandrian named Cinder when their leader, Lord Haliax, pressures them to depart due to the approach of some mysterious enemies of theirs.

The heavily traumatized Kvothe, alive but all alone, spends three years in the slums of the city of Tarbean as a beggar and pickpocket. He is nudged out of this life by hearing a story-teller recount a story of how the hero Lanre became a renegade after the death of his beloved wife, went over to the evil forces he had fought and destroyed the cities with whose protection he was charged - and then changed his name and became himself the fearsome Lord Haliax of the Chandrian. Before Kvothe could ask more, the story-teller is arrested by the dominant Church, on charges of heresy. (This world has a religion similar - though not identical - to Medieval Christianity).

In order to find more, Kvothe is determined to get into The University (there seems to be only one in this world) whose vast Archives include all kinds of accumulated knowledge - including, presumably, also on the Chandrian. Having with great effort obtained some minimal funds for clothing and travelling, he sets out. En route Kvothe becomes enamored of a talented young woman known as Denna, who is a musician like Kvothe. Kvothe enters the University despite his lack of tuition funds, and performs admirably as a student, but faces continuous poverty and rivalries with the wealthy student Ambrose and the arrogant Master Hemme. A trick by Ambrose causes Kvothe to be banished from the Archives, hampering his research on the Chandrian - though he does very well in other fields of study, advancing extremely fast in academic degrees and gaining some loyal friends. Kvothe buys a lute despite his poverty, and performs brilliantly at a famous musical tavern to earn money, where he also befriends Denna again.

Hearing reports of blue fire and murder at a rural wedding, he suspects the Chandrian, and visits the site. There, Kvothe and Denna meet a local farmer who reported blue fire, and later as they are searching for the Chandrian, they encounter a draccus, which nearly destroys the local town before it is slain by Kvothe. He does succeed in discovering the reason why the Chandrian murdered all participants at the wedding: the bride's father had dug in the earth and discovered an old pot on which were paintings of all seven Chandrian; they came to recover the pot and kill anyone who may have seen it.

Back at the University, Ambrose taunts Kvothe, who breaks Ambrose's arm by summoning the wind; whereupon Master Namer Elodin accepts Kvothe as an advanced student of his own.

In the inn in the present day, a mercenary possessed by a demonic force attacks the patrons and kills one of them before he is killed by a young patron. The first day ends when Kvothe finishes the first chapter of his story and the town settles down for the night. At night, Bast breaks into Chronicler's room and urges him to focus Kvothe on the more heroic aspects of his story, in the hope that Kvothe will abandon his apathy.